C++Now 2017 std2 Workshop - Day 3, 05-19-2017
=============================================

AM: Alisdair Meredith
BAL: Bryce Adelstein Lelbach
MC: Marshall Clow
GA: Gasper A
CW: Charles Wilson
BB: Billy Baker
BS: Bob Stegall
AD: Allan Deutsch
RK: Robin Kuzmin
JL: Joe Loser
MS: Michael Spencer
ZL: Zach Laine
BD: Ben Deane
PB: Peter B
LL: Lisa Lippincott
JLL: Jean-Louis Leroy
AK: Aditya Kumar
WM: Wesley Maxey
JM: John McFarlane
Lakos: John Lakos
DS: David Sankel
KD: Kirk Douglas
???:
 
Volunteers to draft a paper:
  AM
  BAL
  GA
  BS
  AD
  ZL
  AK
  PB
  MC (review)

How important is a Vision?
--------------------------

JM: Vision may be implicit because features go through a small group of people. A vision is helpful but not essential.

ZL: I have the opposite opinion. STL had clear vision (from Stepanov). The rest is ad-hoc. In LEWG, we frequently have consistency issues. We need a vision.
BAL: Concur.

BS: Three design principles:
* Conceptual elegance
* Mnemonic (naming) elegance
* Remember the customer - many C++ users are not using newer features.

GA: Vision is essential because it narrows scope. We must be smart about how we narrow scope. BS offers one approach to narrowing scope. Not sure what the approach should be, but we need one.

PB: C++ is increasing in complexity. The library should help with that by being consistent. Vision is imperative.

AM: We tried to have a coherent vision, but not globally - just within certain scopes (iostreams, concurrency).

STRAW POLL:
std did fine without one: 1
Helpful, but not essential: 3
Vital if we want to build a coherent library for the next few decades: 15

MC: I am voting vital because it most closely matches my view, but I think I'm closer to "extremely vital"

JLL: Why I voted against: Vision is good, but avoid tight coupling.

GA: Loose coupling can be part of the vision.

What is the essence of std2?
----------------------------

Lakos: Something between bullet #1 and #2. Reimaging means it could look nothing like std. As close as possible means we may give up on good ideas.

AM and Lakos: Neither #1 or #2 is drop-in replacement.

AM: First 1 - major changes, but we don't know what they are.

BD: I prefer #1. Ex: allocators were bad. CLARIFY??

ZL: I prefer #1. Ex: reboot iostreams, size_t being used for sizes/indexes. I want us to be open for radical changes.

AM: Is bullet #3 what you want?

AM: A new tuple would be in 1 and 2 but not 3

ZL: I would be fine with 1 or 3.

LL: Real diff between 1 and 2: it's a question of what our priorities are. 1 is about the future, willing to break the past. 2 is about the past, willing to leave out things that would improve the future.

PB: #1 - reinventing the wheel. Ex: python.

BD: C++11/14/17 changes so much that it is not practical to keep building on std. 

AM: Another option: do std2 IN std - breaking changes.

GA: I think these are false alternatives, their is room for all of them in std2. We know std is not perfect. Ex: std::max, algorithms not returning the iterators they compute. Allocator design. Interoperabilitiy between std and std2 presents a real challenge.

CW: Java reinvented the library multiple times. It is nice that they have a modern library for new developers.

BAL: 3 points:
* We can design for interoperability. Ex: string_view.
* Should std2 be a self-contained library? I think yes.
* What is the timeline? Do we develop std2 incrementally? What lifetime should we plan for it? I think 2050.

MC: There are things in std that are tied to the compiler/ABI and probably can't move (std::get, std::typeinfo, etc).

BAL: I'm fine with leaving those.

MC: Then the answer to your Q2 is never.

AM: We may be able to migrate them if that's the only blocker.

AD: Need to support many use cases - no exceptions, different data structures (for the gaming community, for example). 

BD: Even the things in std that are "good", that we like, are not perfect. We like vector, but we would design it differently today.

GA: Put breaking things in std2, leave the rest in std.

BAL: Users shouldn't have to learn both std and std2. I don't want people to have to remember which namespace they need to use for which thing. I'd be fine with this temporarily (next 10 years), but 20 years from now I want someone to only need to learn std2.

AM: We have better ways to work around ABI breakage today. We could port everything to std2 and then incrementally fix it.
 
STRAW POLL:
#1
SF|F|N|A|SA
13|6|0|1|0

DS: I am against because I am worried about having multiple forms of things
(std::string, std2::string), but could probably be convinced.

#2
SF|F|N|A|SA
0|5|1|10|4

#3
SF|F|N|A|SA
2|9|5|3|1

MS: No like-for-like duplication. If we have something better, we should move it over. If it didn't say no like-for-like, I'd be SF.

Lakos: Why can't we put new things in std?

MS: We want to reuse terminology.


#4
BAL: Is #4 asking if we proceed with our current conservativeness WRT breaking changes?

AM: Yes, we'd still have to fight for changes.

SF|F|N|A|SA
0|4|0|8|6

BAL: I voted for, because I'm willing to fight for changes and don't want people to have to cherry-pick from std and std2. I want one or the other in the long term. 

AM: So, we like 1 and 3.

JLL: Maybe stdold, to put old things in.

AM: We don't own this namespace.

AD: If we take non-breaking changes and put them in std, that's a breaking change.

CW and GA: Moving things to stdold would be a breaking change.

What is the future of std?
--------------------------

AM: Where do concepts fit in? I think std2 should be concepts from day 1.

PB: std2 should be a universal new interface. You shouldn't need anything from std. But std should still be there as a legacy ABI.

LL: It seems clear we can't move away from all of std (compiler hooks, etc). But do you imagine we can deprecate things piecemeal?

AM: I'm thinking that when std2 is ready, we can do a global deprecation of std.

LL: I would argue for a bullet point for piecemeal deprecation.

DS: Given the scale of C++ code and C++ developers. Eventually we will have more code than developers. If the idea is that we will manually port from std to std2. I liked JLL's idea of a stdold. I don't think we can deprecate/remove std ever.

BAL: I would be willing to deprecate, but I do not want to remove std. std should be evergreen.

MC: The acceptable amount of breakage is near 0 once something is standardized. 

LL: I am somewhat in agreement with Bryce and David. If the same facility is in std2 and std, presumably the std2 facility is the newer one and the one with a longer lifetime. Ex: We deprecated auto_ptr.

MC: We removed auto_ptr in C++17. And it was a tough fight.

PB: Other frameworks/languages ship the old versions and the new versions.

KD: Do we want people working on a project from scratch to use std or std2. Should people use the newest, or the oldest? Counting "down" instead of up means that the newest stuff is always in std. 

??: If you have a stdold, it's an implicit deprecate and a breaking change. You always have to pick a version of the standard to use.

KD: Yah, but I have to pick the number.

KD: In order to not break the interface, when new breaking changes are introduced, you just go back to your code and pick the old version. You only have to think about versions when you hit a breaking change.

GA: Do you use header-only libraries?

KD: Yes.

GA: Let's say I use your library, and you use std::vector which supports the current allocators. Let's say a change to vector comes along and breaks things. I can fix my code, but not yours.

JLL: Where do we design new features? std or std2?

MC: Do it in Boost.

BAL: Does deprecate mean eventually remove?

AM: No. I was intentionally vague, but it does not necessarily mean remove.

RK: Does deprecate mean no more new work?

AM: No.

#1
SF|F|N|A|SA
9|6|2|2|0

#2
SF|F|N|A|SA
0|3|7|6|2

#3
SF|F|N|A|SA
1|5|3|4|5

AD: I find it difficult to vote on #3 because we don't know what the criteria
for std and std2.

What is the minimum we can land?
--------------------------------

BAL: AM, do we have to put TSes in std::experimental? Could we just put it in std2?

AM: Policy is ::experimental but that is not in stone.

BAL: I like #3 because TSes iterate faster.

GA: I liked option #3 on the last slide because it would let us get incremental improvements, like Ranges.

AM: Remember that Ranges has our core concepts library in it. It's important we get it right.

PB: You have maturity and size, and you are discussing both on this slide.

LL: If we do the whole thing, we might end up with some complete things and some rushed and half-baked things.

ZL: I like the TS model. Ranges is mature, it's got a 3rd party implementation.

BAL and MC: 3rd party implementation experience is NOT sufficient, major stdlib vendor implementation experience is a much higher bar.

ZL: I agree the TS is not fully finished. When it is, I want us to put it in std2.

BAL: I agree.

#1

BAL: Can you clarify, is #1 polling on Ranges specifically for C++20?

VOTES: 10

#2

VOTES: 4

#3

VOTES: 1

BAL: I voted for #3. My hesistance isn't about Ranges, it's about its dependencies (e.g. language features it needs). I want to see those ship first. Also, I am not necessarily in favor of one big TS - a seris of TSes is fine.

What language features are essential to new library design?
-----------------------------------------------------------

LL: Can you clarify the poll - are we voting on a schedule (20) or just the need for them? My confidence in the readiness of these features varies.

Modules
SF|F|N|A|SA
15|3|1|0|0

Concepts
SF|F|N|A|SA
15|3|0|0|1

BAL: ???

GA and ZL: I voted SF, but would've voted A if this was about this specific concepts model.

Contracts
SF|F|N|A|SA
1|6|10|2|0

ZL: I'd like to see implementation experience.

JM: I don't want to force us to design for contracts from the start.

AM: We could get rid of vector::at; we'd want to know it before.

BAL: The standard library is already designed with contracts in mind.

Coroutines
SF|F|N|A|SA
6|7|5|1|0

Compile-time Reflection
SF|F|N|A|SA
0|9|9|0|0

BAL: Abstained, because I'm not sure. I'd need to evaluate.

Runtime Reflection
SF|F|N|A|SA
0|2|10|5|0

Comparison operators
SF|F|N|A|SA
4|4|9|0|0

Uniform call syntax
SF|F|N|A|SA
2|7|6|2|3

AM: Only one I will vote on.

